# 0.1-beta.3

## Release status

Early beta

## Changes

- Various fixes in implementations of WindowBehavior
- `relm4_store_collections::data_container::DataContainer` updates and fixes
- `relm4_store_collections::data_container::WindowChangeset` was moved

## Migration from 0.1-beta.2

### WindowBehavior

Various adjustments were made to WindowBehavior implementations to make them behave more like advertised. In most cases no action should be needed.

List of updated behaviors

- ValueTrackingWindow
- KeepOnTop
- KeepOnBottom

### Updates to `relm4-store::window::WindowTransition`

Two new states were identified in which window can change. `TransitionLeft(usize)` and `TransitionRight(usize)`. If window behavior will return this states it means that only position of the elements in the store changed. No content of the record was changed.

> If you use `ValueTrackingWindow` and you are currently showing records from 10-20. If you remove 5th record in the store, then records which are visible shouldn't change but index at which they are shown is. Which requires call to the `StoreViewPrototype::view` so you can show a proper index.

`window_behavior` example was updated to show the index of the record.

`SlideLeft(usize)` and `SlideRight(usize)` are now used to denote that window needs to change which records are shown and no change in records was made.

| Variant | Changes in shown records | Updates to perform on the ui |
|:--------|:-------------------------|:-----------------------------|
| `TransitionLeft(by)`  | Position of shown records in store was changed by `-by`. We are still showing the same records. | All records will have update method called, since position is part of the `StoreViewPrototype::view` signature |
| `TransitionRight(by)` | Position of shown records in store was changed by `by`. We are still showing the same records.  | All records will have update method called, since position is part of the `StoreViewPrototype::view` signature |
| `SlideLeft(by)`       | View windows was moved for a `by` records to the left. We need to hide `by` records from right to show `by` records from left | `by` records will be added in the ui from left, and `by` records will be removed from right. Records which are outside of the slide range will not be updated |
| `SlideRight(by)`      | View windows was moved for a `by` records to the right. We need to hide `by` records from left to show `by` records from right | `by` records will be added in the ui from right, and `by` records will be removed from left. Records which are outside of the slide range will not be updated |

### DataContainer

#### Moved to the `data_container`

Beta.2 allowed access to the `DataContainer` via `relm4_store_collections::DataContainer`. Now it's available as `relm4_store_collections::data_container::DataContainer`.

#### remove_left behavior change

Before the update there was a bug in the `DataContainer::left_remove` where records passed in `left_records` were inserted in wrong order into the container.

> If you had a container `[a, b, c, d, e]` and asked to remove left at position 4 two elements and insert left records [1, 2] then old behavior resulted in the container
> looking `[2, 1, a, b, d, e]` while it should `[1, 2, a, b, d, e]`

Now it behaves as expected.

### WindowChangeset

Beta.2 allowed access to the `WindowChangeset` via `relm4_store_collections::WindowChangeset`. Now it's available as `relm4_store_collections::data_container::WindowChangeset`.
`WindowChangeset` is part of the `DataContainer` so the move there caused this changes
