# How it came to existence

It's mid of 2021. I've started to learn Rust for a second time. This time I had an idea for an internal project for my company. I needed to create an gui application.

I've found relm. I've started to learn it. Nice lib. Most people in company are linux/gnome users so gtk was perfect choice. But it was gtk-3 lib and gtk-4 was becoming a main version. After bit of looking around I found a relm4. Now I had a lib to write my application. So let's get started. 2 week later I was in pinch. I had a dataset weighting around 200GB, needed to show it twice, it must have a filtering and grouping. Filtering could be done either global (so both view were applied the same filter) or local so filters are independent or both. So I implemented first version of widget using provided relm4 factories. Doing it was a disaster. Ok. Attempt 2. Let's dive into gtk list views. Bit better. I could do most of things. But now let's repeat process for another data set, and another data set... Tears of blood. Now I received a requirement from one of the users. Scrollbar sucks. It doesn't provide any meaningful information about where user is. So let's just make them steer a speed of scroll (relative scrolling) instead of track position (absolute scrolling). Oh and I forgot. I would like to have an option to change a behavior of visible data if records are inserted in the visible sub set. Now I was sitting in the corner of my room. Crying. I'm the boss. I own this company. I've created a tool for myself. It sucks but makes it better then whatever was before and I only receive complaints... Ok it's useful. My workers just would like to spend a bit time less there. Let's try...

A few relm4 tickets later I knew lib good enough to start. And I ended with creating first version of store. It was even more primitive then any factory in relm4. It supported only adding elements at the end of the set but had an ability to ignore changes outside of visible window.

It's still at beginning of the journey.
